Add proposal to specify a default Messaging middleware (#228)
kyma-project/community: sig-and-wg/wg-knative/knative-eventing-default-pubsub.md

# Overview

As an operator, I want to configure a default messaging middleware that my Kyma cluster should use for eventing.

As a developer, I just want to configure a subscription for an event type from a source in Kyma and do not care about the underlying details.

## Requirement

> * The pluggable Knative layer for the messaging middlewar (Knative ClusterChannelProvisioner) is available and deployable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The pluggable Knative layer for the messaging middleware (Knative ClusterChannelProvisioner) is available and deployable.
```

* Operator will provision the pluggable layer into Kyma (Knative ClusterChannelProvisioner).
  > Note: There will be some refernce examples that customers can follow. The provisioning/deployment will be an operator action as customes can choose a implementation specific to their needs.
* Kyma is updated to use Knative version 0.4+.

> ## The out-of-box Kyma installation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## The out-of-the-box Kyma installation
```

The OOB Kyma installation will have NATS Streaming set as the default messaging middleware. The required Knative configurations will be set to use that.

## When to specify the default?

### Post Installation

* Operator either creates a PubSub instance or use existing one.

  >Note: For instance creation, she can use service catalog. Ths is not a must.

* Operator deploys the cluster channel provisioner and injects the secrets.

> * Use [Knative semantics](https://github.com/knative/docs/blob/master/eventing/channels/default-channels.md#setting-the-default-channel-configuration) to specify the default ClusterChannelProvisioner.

Reviewer: Can you describe how the developer will create a channel and will use the default provisioner? Can he still use other provisioners (not default)?

Author: There is another concept in-progress for this.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: default-channel-webhook
  namespace: knative-eventing
data:
  default-channel-config: |
    clusterdefault:
      apiversion: eventing.knative.dev/v1alpha1
      kind: ClusterChannelProvisioner
      name: cloud-pubsub
    namespacedefaults:
      some-namespace:
        apiversion: eventing.knative.dev/v1alpha1
        kind: ClusterChannelProvisioner
        name: cloud-pubsub
```

### Why not during installation?

> * There is no standard way to deploy a provisioner. It can be done via Helm Chart, plain kubernetes deployments or some other mechanism. 

Reviewer: Do we have any helper for Operator how to install provisioner? Is it just a readme file? Or maybe we should have a bundle for helm broker that installs provisioner in the same way how we install service broker (Azure broker, GCP broker)?

Author: This is currently an open item about installing the provisioner. In essence, provisioner is one or many K8S deployments. Without limiting to a specific way, we need to figure out how we can have some reference. Since many will already be available in open source, customers might simply reuse that.

Reviewer: Please put it in the proposal that providing automation is out of scope and only documentation will be provided.

* There may be scenarios to reuse some existing instance.

## What happens to NATS Streaming?

* Operator has the possibility to deprovision if she wishes to save costs. 
  >Note: The detailed deprovisioning/migration will be solved via collaboration with Knative community and will be solved in future.

**Concerns**

* It can lead to broken state if there are already some resources created with NATS Streaming.

## Can the default be changed?

### Yes, default can be changed

* The existing channels/subscriptions still stay the same with the previous PubSub. [Same approach](https://github.com/knative/docs/blob/master/eventing/channels/default-channels.md#caveats-1) as followed by Knative.

**Concerns**

* It can lead to broken state if operators deprovision the previous default.

## How to support the operator

With great power comes great responsibility. Operator will have power to leverage pluggability of messaginng middleware. This implies the responsibility to not break the system.

There should be some User Interface that can help operator to avoid mistakes. Some of the details include:

* Existing ClusterChannelProvisioner in the system.

> * Any channels/resources related for the ClusterChannelProvisioner. If there is none, then operator knows that deprovisioning is safe.

Reviewer: I like UI helpers ideas, but additionally, we should use built-in kubernetes features to prevent deleting resources that are in use (owner reference / finalizers)

# Overview

As an operator, I want to configure a default messaging middleware that my Kyma cluster should use for eventing.

> As a developer, I just want to configure a subscription for an event type from a source in Kyma and do not care about the underlying details.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a developer, I want to configure a subscription for an event type from a source in Kyma. I don't want to care about the underlying details.
```

## Requirements

* The pluggable Knative layer for the messaging middleware (Knative ClusterChannelProvisioner) is available and deployable.
* The operator provisions the pluggable layer into Kyma (Knative ClusterChannelProvisioner).

>   > Note: There will be some refernce examples that customers can follow. The provisioning/deployment will be an operator action as customes can choose a implementation specific to their needs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  > **NOTE**: There will be some examples that customers can follow. The provisioning/deployment will be an operator action as customers can choose an implementation specific to their needs.
```

* Kyma is updated to use Knative version 0.4+.

## The out-of-the-box Kyma installation

> The OOTB Kyma installation will have NATS Streaming set as the default messaging middleware. The required Knative configurations will be set to use that.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The OOTB Kyma installation will have NATS Streaming set as the default messaging middleware. The required Knative configurations will be set to use it.
```

## When to specify the default?

### Post Installation

* Operator either creates a PubSub instance or use existing one.

>   >Note: For instance creation, she can use service catalog. Ths is not a must.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  >**NOTE:** To create an instance, the operator can use service catalog. This is not a must.
```

> * Operator deploys the cluster channel provisioner and injects the secrets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The operator deploys the cluster channel provisioner and injects the secrets.
```

* Use [Knative semantics](https://github.com/knative/docs/blob/master/eventing/channels/default-channels.md#setting-the-default-channel-configuration) to specify the default ClusterChannelProvisioner.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: default-channel-webhook
  namespace: knative-eventing
data:
  default-channel-config: |
    clusterdefault:
      apiversion: eventing.knative.dev/v1alpha1
      kind: ClusterChannelProvisioner
      name: cloud-pubsub
    namespacedefaults:
      some-namespace:
        apiversion: eventing.knative.dev/v1alpha1
        kind: ClusterChannelProvisioner
        name: cloud-pubsub
```

>   * There will a separate concept where the operator will be able to specify a non-default messaging middleware.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * A separate concept will be added, where the operator is able to specify a non-default messaging middleware.
```

### Why not during installation?

> * There is no standard way to deploy a provisioner. It can be done via Helm Chart, plain kubernetes deployments or some other mechanism. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* There is no standard way to deploy a provisioner. It can be done via Helm Chart, plain Kubernetes deployments or other mechanisms. 
```

>   * We do not intend to impose a restriction as provisioners will be implemented in Knative open source or by customers or partners themselves.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * We do not intend to impose a restriction as provisioners will be implemented in Knative open source or by customers or partners themselves.
```

* The injection of secrets during installation will be tricky.

> * There may be scenarios to reuse some existing instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* There may be scenarios assuming the reuse of some existing instance.
```

## What happens to NATS Streaming?

> * Operator has the possibility to deprovision if she wishes to save costs. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The operator has the possibility pf deprovisioning to save costs. 
```

>   >Note: The detailed deprovisioning/migration will be solved via collaboration with Knative community and will be solved in future.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  >**NOTE:** The detailed deprovisioning/migration will be solved in the future, through collaborating with Knative community.
```

>   >**NOTE:** The detailed deprovisioning/migration will be solved in the future, through collaborating with Knative community.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  >**NOTE:** The detailed deprovisioning/migration will be solved in the future through the collaboration with Knative community.
```

**Concerns**

> * It can lead to broken state if there are already some resources created with NATS Streaming.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* It can lead to a broken state if there are already some resources created with NATS Streaming.
```

## Can the default be changed?

> ### Yes, default can be changed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Yes, default can be changed**.
```

* The existing channels/subscriptions still stay the same with the previous PubSub. [Same approach](https://github.com/knative/docs/blob/master/eventing/channels/default-channels.md#caveats-1) as followed by Knative.

**Concerns**

> * It can lead to broken state if operators deprovision the previous default.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* It can lead to a broken state if operators deprovision the previous default.
```

## How to support the operator

> With great power comes great responsibility. Operator will have power to leverage pluggability of messaginng middleware. This implies the responsibility to not break the system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With great power comes great responsibility. The operator will have the power to leverage the pluggability of messaging middleware. This implies the responsibility for not breaking the system.
```

* Add possible validations in place that can prevent the operator from a destructive operation.

> * There should be some User Interface that can help operator to avoid mistakes. Some of the details include:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* There should be some User Interface that can help operator to avoid mistakes. The details include:
```

  * Existing ClusterChannelProvisioner in the system.
  * Any channels/resources related for the ClusterChannelProvisioner. If there is none, then operator knows that deprovisioning is safe.

>   * Additionally for each channel there is a drill down for channel details and its resources. This will help the operator to understand the existing set up better.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Additionally, each channel features a drill down to view channel details and resources. This will help the operator to better understand the existing setup.
```
